[Amit Varma]: A few years ago, a photograph went viral on Facebook. It was a picture of two girls hanging
[Amit Varma]: from a tree. It had been taken in the Badao district of Uttar Pradesh, and the girls were
[Amit Varma]: 16 and 14 years old. Their slippers lay at the trunk of the tree. Later, we would find
[Amit Varma]: that the women gathered there had come to protect the bodies of the girls with their
[Amit Varma]: bodies. And one of the patriarchs had decided that the girls would not be brought down from
[Amit Varma]: the tree until justice was done. They turned away the police, they turned away local politicians.
[Amit Varma]: Eventually, the world woke up and paid attention. Violence against women in India is commonplace.
[Amit Varma]: Rapes are commonplace. The statistics are overwhelming. And yet, this case captured
[Amit Varma]: the imagination of the nation. Two girls go out in the late evening to defecate in an
[Amit Varma]: open field. A few hours later, they are hanging from a tree. The family alleges that they
[Amit Varma]: were gang raped. Later, others hinted on a killing. There is an angle of caste, there
[Amit Varma]: is an angle of local politics, there is misogyny everywhere. The early narratives around this
[Amit Varma]: case turn out to be not quite true. And in fact, we may never know what happened that
[Amit Varma]: day. But this much is clear. A tragedy took place that night, two girls died, and we live
[Unknown]: in a broken society. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics,
[Unknown]: politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Sonia Falero, a journalist and writer
[Amit Varma]: of narrative nonfiction, whose new book, The Good Girls, deals with the tragic incident
[Amit Varma]: I just mentioned in Katra, Sadatganj in the district of Badaun in Uttar Pradesh in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: Sonia is an old friend, and we hung out for many years in the aughties till she shifted
[Amit Varma]: from Mumbai to London about a decade ago. She spent a fair bit of time reporting on
[Amit Varma]: the farmer's suicides in Vidarbha. And once she found her voice, the focus of her journalism
[Amit Varma]: was always on marginalized people. While she was in Mumbai, she wrote a superb book called
[Amit Varma]: The Beautiful Thing, chronicling the life of a bar dancer in Mumbai. I was privileged
[Amit Varma]: enough to be privy to many drafts of that fine book, and was blown away by her craft
[Amit Varma]: and work ethic. After she shifted away, she continued making regular trips to India, reporting
[Amit Varma]: from here. And a few years ago, she released a Kindle single called 13 Men, a stunning
[Amit Varma]: piece of reportage about the gang rape of a 20 year old in a village in West Bengal,
[Amit Varma]: also in 2014. 13 Men felt like a modern version of Rashomon. Her reporting was intensive,
[Amit Varma]: she spoke to everyone, covered every angle. And yet at the end, you weren't quite sure
[Amit Varma]: what had really happened. We sometimes deal with the complexity of the real world by building
[Amit Varma]: simple narratives or choosing simple narratives. But Sonia's work embraces that complexity
[Amit Varma]: and shines a light through its many layers. The Good Girls does exactly that. Sonia spent
[Amit Varma]: years researching and writing this book, and there is much in it that is not in the public
[Amit Varma]: domain, and that people don't know about this story. When the news of the two girls first
[Amit Varma]: hit the media in 2014, it seemed like a clear case of gang rape and murder. And yet we now
[Amit Varma]: know that the early testimonies by the family were made up and motivated. Later, it seemed
[Amit Varma]: that it might be an honor killing, but there's no evidence for that either. Although medieval
[Amit Varma]: notions of honor do play an important part. Sonia examines every angle, pulls every strand
[Amit Varma]: as far as it will go. And by the end, I was left with the sense that everyone is a victim
[Amit Varma]: in the story. And at the same time, everyone is complicit. You'll have to read the book
[Amit Varma]: to see what I mean. And despite the grim subject matter, it's a heck of a read with all the
[Amit Varma]: characters coming alive for us. I finished the book in one sitting, and so will you.
[Amit Varma]: I spent a big chunk of the conversation you're about to hear talking about Sonia's writing
[Amit Varma]: process and her approach to journalism, especially in India. Her process is both daunting and
[Amit Varma]: inspiring. And while I know many, many journalists, I don't know anyone quite like Sonia Falero.
[Amit Varma]: You'll see what I mean when you hear her talk about her work and when you read her books.
[Amit Varma]: But before we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Many years ago, I could not have done this podcast and you would not be listening to
[Amit Varma]: me in the way that you are now. Digital technology has changed our lives. And it's kind of sad
[Amit Varma]: that we take it for granted. Well, I want to recommend an online course that delves
[Amit Varma]: deep into just this subject. This episode of the scene and the unseen is sponsored by
[Amit Varma]: The Great Courses Plus. And if you head on over to TheGreatCoursesPlus.com, you'll find
[Amit Varma]: a course called How Digital Technology Shapes Us by Indre Viscontas. It looks at subjects
[Amit Varma]: ranging from the impact of digital media on attention spans, how AI is changing health
[Amit Varma]: care and relationships, how algorithms can shape democracy and the future of both work
[Amit Varma]: and humanity. It's thought provoking and so are many other courses in this site. The Great
[Amit Varma]: Courses Plus has a fantastic library of online courses from subjects ranging from music,
[Amit Varma]: math, cooking, history, political theory and much else. They also have an app where you
[Amit Varma]: can listen to the audio of these courses the same way you listen to podcasts and it will
[Amit Varma]: cost you nothing. You can get one month of unlimited free access by using the following
[Amit Varma]: URL, TheGreatCoursesPlus.com slash unseen. That's right. Unseen. TheGreatCoursesPlus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen for one month of unlimited free access. Don't miss out.
[Amit Varma]: Sonia welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you. You know, it's been a long time
[Amit Varma]: coming and you know, I've been meaning to invite you on the show for a while now, but
[Amit Varma]: you took six years to write the book. So it's not entirely my fault. Of course, there are
[Amit Varma]: many other things we could have spoken about. And you know, while researching for, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the kind of stuff I should ask you, what I do with all my guests is I ask them about
[Amit Varma]: their pasts and their kind of their intellectual journeys and how they got to where they got.
[Amit Varma]: And I did exactly this exercise a couple of days ago when I recorded with another friend
[Amit Varma]: I've known for as long as you, Deepak Chinoy. And I've realized with both of you that even
[Amit Varma]: though we have hung out so much, we have spent so much time at different points in time,
[Amit Varma]: that there is still a lot about you that I don't really know, which, you know, struck
[Amit Varma]: me as so odd. So let's kind of fill in the gaps now and tell me a little bit about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, when you were young, what was your journey like? What brought you to journalism to begin
[Guest]: with and to writing? So I grew up the youngest of three children.
[Guest]: I think I would describe my childhood as lonely and filled with books. I taught myself to
[Guest]: read at a very young age, and I simply read all the time. That's all I did. I read my
[Guest]: sister's books, and I read my mother's books. My father had been a lawyer, and I think all
[Guest]: he had were law books, so I didn't get to them. I'm still yet to. But that was my entire
[Guest]: childhood. I didn't hang out with other children very much that I can remember. I didn't try
[Guest]: and learn any other skills because I knew that I would be a writer. And I tested the
[Guest]: waters out quite early on with my mother. I wanted to see what she would think about
[Guest]: me being a writer. Well, my mother was a writer as well. She wrote a book, a couple of books
[Guest]: actually, to help children learn French, which was one of the five languages she was fluent
[Guest]: in. And she also did translation and other kinds of writing. So I didn't expect that
[Guest]: my mother would find it odd, but I was still interested in knowing. And she said, I think
[Guest]: you would be great. She also, by the way, said that when I asked, told her that I wanted
[Guest]: to be an actress. And she also said that when I said I would like to be a doctor. So, you
[Guest]: know, that was just my mom. But having the security from a very young age to know that
[Guest]: this decision that I had taken was endorsed by the person that I most valued, it was really
[Guest]: wonderful because it meant that I never had any confusion. It also meant that I never
[Guest]: bothered to study much because, you know, I was going to be a writer. But I had that
[Guest]: one security and I think it has been the most beneficial thing for me.
[Amit Varma]: And what kind of books did you read? And more so, what kind of writer did you see yourself
[Amit Varma]: becoming? Because your first book, after all, was not, you know, a book of nonfiction or
[Amit Varma]: the kind of work you've grown to do. It was a novel. So how did you evolve as a reader
[Guest]: and a writer?
[Guest]: I don't remember stepping into a bookshop until years, years later. And, you know, anybody
[Guest]: who grew up in India during the 80s would probably have the same experience as I did,
[Guest]: which is you had access to a very eclectic collection of books. And they were by English
[Guest]: writers mostly. And so I started off with Enid Blyton's. Then I went to just the weirdest
[Guest]: stuff, you know. So Richard Bach, because that was a writer who was by my mother's bedside.
[Guest]: I have a clear memory, and I'm sure this is true of every one of my generation, of reading
[Guest]: Eric Segal's Love Story way before I should have been allowed to. Daphne du Maurier. And
[Guest]: that was it. It was just a random collection of books. I mean, I didn't have somebody saying
[Guest]: to me, well, these are the 10 books you must read. Although I remember at a very early
[Guest]: age, maybe four or five, one of my presents being a abridged collection of the classics.
[Guest]: So you know, Jane Eyre, David Copperfield. I had that. And then I had just a hodgepodge.
[Guest]: And that meant that was actually really good, because it meant that I read all kinds of
[Guest]: writing for all age groups. I read all kinds of styles of writing. But I don't recall reading
[Guest]: nonfiction. I only read fiction. And I think one of the reasons is because we don't have
[Guest]: a history of narrative nonfiction. That is a very American thing, or creative nonfiction.
[Guest]: We had our nonfiction growing up was history by the most eminent people like Romila Thapar.
[Guest]: And I was never going to be Romila Thapar. So I was always going to be a novelist. And
[Guest]: then, as you say, I wrote my first novel. It was a book called A Girl. I published it
[Guest]: in my 20s. My gosh, I really can't write fiction. And I'm so glad that I realized that after
[Guest]: just one book. And yes, that's what happened with my fiction career.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I've kind of thought about a bit as well, which is, you know, again,
[Amit Varma]: something I was discussing with Deepak. And it's really interesting that our generation
[Amit Varma]: growing up in the 80s and the 90s, whatever we are exposed to in terms of what we read
[Amit Varma]: or whatever is very random and arbit, and it's just all over the place. And then our
[Amit Varma]: generation itself kind of becomes a bridge between a world where everything is at your
[Amit Varma]: fingertips, where you can, in a sense, educate yourself, read anything you want, you don't
[Amit Varma]: have to figure out, how do I get hold of a book, everything is out there, that kind of
[Amit Varma]: changes everything. And I would imagine that that is not just true in the case of like,
[Amit Varma]: the books that you read or whatever. But it's also true in the case of the values you imbibe
[Amit Varma]: about the things that you do. For example, journalism, that, you know, you look at foreign
[Amit Varma]: journalism, and you imbibe a certain sense of values, you begin to realize the possibilities
[Amit Varma]: of narrative nonfiction. I did an episode with Saman Subramanian on narrative nonfiction
[Amit Varma]: where, kind of he spoke about that process of discovery as well in the late 90s, in the
[Amit Varma]: 2000s. And so you got into journalism, I'm presuming because you thought that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I want to be a writer, and this seems like a natural profession. Where did it go from
[Amit Varma]: there? Where is that point where that sense of the kind of work that you do, begins to
[Amit Varma]: solidify and fructify?
[Guest]: I worked in three newsrooms in my 20s. And in one of the newsrooms that I worked in that
[Guest]: I won't mention, you know, the, the attitude was that the reporters are the menial laborers
[Guest]: who shouldn't be given time, who shouldn't be given respect, who don't need to be nurtured.
[Guest]: And one's ambition should be to become an editor, because an editor hangs out with politicians.
[Guest]: An editor gets to name drop that they know, you know, the big politician of that time
[Guest]: was LK Advani, it was Jaitley, and the big persona of that time was Nandan Nilekani.
[Guest]: And the newsroom in which I worked was full of editors name dropping these three gentlemen's
[Guest]: names and talking about how they came for lunch, or, you know, the report, the editors
[Guest]: were invited to dinner. And the sense that I got was that there was no journalism happening.
[Guest]: There was no aspiration to write about India, there was simply an aspiration to social mobility,
[Guest]: to economic power. And it was not something that I had any interest in. And because I
[Guest]: had by then worked in three newsrooms, I felt that if this is what it means to be a journalist,
[Guest]: then it's not a good fit for me. And that's actually when I decided that I wouldn't be
[Guest]: a journalist. And I don't really know at that point what I wanted to be. I just knew that
[Guest]: I couldn't be this because this couldn't be the trajectory of my life. These couldn't
[Guest]: be my goals. But actually, Amit, when I made the switch was after a conversation with you,
[Guest]: and another one of our friends, the journalist Rahul Patia, and I don't know if you remember
[Guest]: this conversation at all, but we were hanging out in Bombay as we did all the time, talking
[Guest]: about books, we'd read books we wanted to write. And at one point in the conversation,
[Guest]: I asked the two of you if you were familiar with the subject of farmer suicides. If you
[Guest]: remember, at that time, the news of the farmer suicides had saturated the front pages. And
[Guest]: it was happening very close to where we were in Bombay. It was happening in Vidarbha. And
[Guest]: we, you, me, Rahul, we were people who we were in the news, right? We were still journalists
[Guest]: and we read the news all the time. But I remember that conversation because none of us really
[Guest]: had got a handle on the problem. And I remember thinking, that is remarkable, that three people
[Guest]: like us who actually do care about the state of the country, don't clearly know what is
[Guest]: happening in Vidarbha. And I felt that that was not because of our lack of interest, or
[Guest]: our lack of attention to the issue. There was something that was going on, in terms
[Guest]: of how the news was being reported, and how we were being presented with the news. And
[Guest]: because I was so curious about what kind of, or what I thought was perhaps a systemic failure
[Guest]: in how we report and present news, I actually asked for special permission from the editor
[Guest]: with whom I was working at the time, to go to Vidarbha, and to just do a story on the
[Guest]: farmer suicides. And actually, my editor, who was awful, and ultimately fired, not,
[Guest]: not at all connected to me. But he, he said, No, your beat is books, just write about books.
[Guest]: And you know, that's another reason why journalism is often not a good fit for young writers
[Guest]: in places like India, because you're constantly being told what you are, and what you can
[Guest]: do, as opposed to being encouraged to do whatever you want, and the best that you can be. But
[Guest]: I, I had no choice. And I simply waited it out. And, you know, as these things happen,
[Guest]: he was fired. And I went back with my pitch to the editor who took his place. And that
[Guest]: editor, Sankar Shantapgarh, great editor, he said, Yeah, sure. And when I went to Vidarbha,
[Guest]: that was the first piece of real reporting that I did. And I met some farmers and their
[Guest]: families. And I spent a few days there. And I think that was the time when all the pieces
[Guest]: came together. And I thought, well, this is it. This is the place where I'm meant to be,
[Guest]: I'm meant to be outside, I'm meant to talk to people, I'm meant to understand the effect
[Guest]: of terrible things, these terrible things on real people, and to tell those stories.
[Guest]: And that was it. That was that was the turning point for me. That one piece.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And one of the sort of the pitfalls that falls, say, a journalist, like a privileged
[Amit Varma]: journalist like us who is going from a city and you're going to a village and you're going
[Amit Varma]: to cover it. I think the first pitfall that you come across is that you want to find a
[Amit Varma]: way to relate to these people as real people, and not as characters in a story that you're
[Amit Varma]: writing, you want to give them that kind of respect. And that also then means that you
[Amit Varma]: have to break that barrier, which is there between you and you want to, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: want to be accepted in their lives. So they are comfortable with your presence, they can
[Amit Varma]: eventually open out to you, they're not always thinking of you as an outsider who's present.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something you've just done remarkably well in your journalism and the books that
[Amit Varma]: you've written. What was this initial process like when you go out there, and it's clearly
[Amit Varma]: obvious that you are just someone from a completely different world from them? How do you win
[Amit Varma]: their trust? How do you, you know, and what are the sort of warnings you're giving yourself
[Amit Varma]: at that time? Like, I have to be respectful of the situation, I have to be able to relate
[Amit Varma]: to them as people. How did you think about it at that time? What were your experiences
[Guest]: like?
[Guest]: I can't recall how I approached the initial years in my reporting. Because of course,
[Guest]: Beautiful Thing was a very distinctive experience. And so was writing The Good Girls. But prior
[Guest]: to Beautiful Thing, I think, I think I was just happy to be there. You know, I felt lucky
[Guest]: to have the opportunity to travel, to talk to people directly, to spend time with them.
[Guest]: I don't think there was anything more than that. But a sense of, I know this, how this
[Guest]: may sound, but it's truly how I felt. I felt a sense of gratitude and joy that I had finally
[Guest]: found my place in the world. You know, my place in the world was not writing fiction.
[Guest]: My place in the world was not being in a newsroom, where somebody would constantly remind me
[Guest]: that the highest goal was to be friends with some politician. My purpose was to, to find
[Guest]: out for myself to find out the answers to the questions I had, I could find those answers
[Guest]: myself, I did not have to be dependent on anybody else. And you know, then certainly,
[Guest]: I, I mean, I was on a salary, but it was not that expensive to travel. And being in Bombay,
[Guest]: which was just so different from being in Delhi, which is where I lived, it was so freeing,
[Guest]: I couldn't believe that I could travel anywhere and everywhere without worrying. And the combination
[Guest]: of those factors, the freedom, I think people, maybe they just got that sense that I was
[Guest]: glad to be there that I was not on the clock, that I would wait around. I don't have an
[Guest]: ego when it comes to my work. I'm easily bruised as in my personal relationships, but not in
[Guest]: my work. I can wait for you forever. And, you know, I've had people tell me to get lost,
[Guest]: slam the door, and then come out and, and call me annoying, which of course I am because
[Guest]: I'm always around. But I understand cues. I am low maintenance. And I'm just happy to
[Guest]: be there. And I think that that becomes quite obvious and people respond to that.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the sort of very insightful things you've said in the past about the way the
[Amit Varma]: mainstream media covers rural India, like first of all, of course, there's a bare fact
[Amit Varma]: that almost hardly any news is about rural India, you cited a study in the book, which
[Amit Varma]: once found that 0.23% of the news in India was about rural India. But the key insight
[Amit Varma]: that you'd once expressed about the way the mainstream media covers the poor is in the
[Amit Varma]: writing that they focus on the differences between the poor and the people who are reading
[Amit Varma]: about them. And when you went in, you were focusing instead on the similarities, how
[Amit Varma]: they are sort of so much like us and not the differences. So you're not exoticizing them
[Amit Varma]: or making them objects in a story. But you're actually making us empathize and putting us
[Amit Varma]: in their shoes and making the whole process seem very natural. So was this something that
[Amit Varma]: you went in knowing that this is a problem? And this is what I have to do about it. And
[Amit Varma]: this is my approach? Or did it gradually evolve over a period of time?
[Guest]: I think that it just wasn't something that I thought about with, you know, a great deal
[Guest]: in those years prior to Beautiful Thing. What it is, is that I find people interesting.
[Guest]: I find them interesting as they are. And I can hang out with people as they are. I don't
[Guest]: expect people to be like me. In fact, I secretly find people to be considerably less interesting
[Guest]: because you know, I mean, I don't think of myself as an interesting person. So I think
[Guest]: I just didn't think about it so deeply. I went there, I spent time with people, I wrote
[Guest]: them as I saw them. And because I saw them over and over under different circumstances,
[Guest]: interacting with different people in different situations, I just got a deeper sense of who
[Guest]: they were. And that's what you read.
[Amit Varma]: And how do you like, you know, we'll come to Beautiful Thing. But one of the sort of
[Amit Varma]: interesting things in terms of your methodology of reporting and sort of embedding yourself,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, that you mentioned about the book is that, you know, you would not just show
[Amit Varma]: up and, you know, pepper questions at them and all of that. Instead, I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the key quote, I remember you saying is that you basically told Leela, can I hang around?
[Amit Varma]: And then you just hung around to a point that at one point, Leela, who's a protagonist of
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful Thing, Leela and her mother actually forgot you were in the room and they locked
[Amit Varma]: you inside, which could have, you know, taken morbid turns, but it didn't. So how did you
[Amit Varma]: kind of arrive at that kind of approach? And what have you sort of found about that kind
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, embedding yourself in that kind of way? Like, often what happens is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I used to be fascinated more than a decade ago by the reality TV show, Big Boss.
[Amit Varma]: And people would say, hey, but it's so contrived, it's artificial and all of that. And the thing
[Amit Varma]: is that, yes, it is a contrived situation. And the people in it are aware of the cameras
[Amit Varma]: for a little period of time. But after that, they just revert to character. You know, after
[Amit Varma]: that, they forget the cameras are there. So in your reporting, is there a period of time
[Amit Varma]: after which the people you're with, forget that you're an outsider, forget that you're
[Amit Varma]: a journalist, you become a part of their lives and so on?
[Guest]: I don't want to say that they forget. And I don't want to say that I become a part of
[Guest]: anyone's life. Because I don't believe that's true. I think especially, you know, in while
[Guest]: reporting The Good Girls, it became very clear to me that the people that I was talking to
[Guest]: were very much aware of how the media works, and very much aware of my presence, and thought
[Guest]: very carefully about what they were saying. So I think that things have changed in the
[Guest]: last few years. I don't want to presume that people trust me. I don't believe that is always
[Guest]: the case. And I feel like that is just a, it's almost impossible to get to that point.
[Guest]: And I don't think that a journalist needs to aspire to trust. I think a journalist needs
[Guest]: to aspire to accuracy and honesty. And that can be achieved without reaching a place where
[Guest]: people confide in you. But with regards to becoming, you know, as I felt in Beautiful
[Guest]: Thing, a part of the furniture, I think, I just am never in a hurry to do anything. Why
[Guest]: should I be in a hurry to publish anything? Who is waiting? Why? Why not just take your
[Guest]: time? I don't get the, well, I remember actually once having an editor early on in my publishing
[Guest]: career who said, if I didn't publish my second book, within two years, people would forget
[Guest]: about me. And I remember for a little while thinking about, oh, I need to publish in two
[Guest]: years and then thinking, oh, but what does it matter if they forget? What do I lose?
[Guest]: As long as I can keep writing my books? And I still feel that it's obviously wonderful
[Guest]: to be read. But also if you're not read, that's not the journey. The journey is not here is
[Guest]: my book and now my life begins. The journey is the reporting and it's all the people you
[Guest]: meet and all the experiences you have and how you're sometimes you feel like your brain
[Guest]: is literally growing because of the amounts of new information you have sudden access
[Guest]: to. That is the journey, you know, and I learned that actually, not just in the last few years,
[Guest]: but I actually learned that after I published my first book, The Girl, you know, I thought
[Guest]: this is my first book. My life is going to change. And of course it didn't. Nothing changed,
[Guest]: you know? And I thought, oh my God, I've been waiting for this moment with such anticipation
[Guest]: and it's so quiet. I can hear a pin drop. And that's the lesson. The lesson is that
[Guest]: it's not what happens when you publish. It is everything before. And that is the time
[Guest]: that you should stretch out as much as possible and read and write and report and just hang
[Guest]: out. And of course, hanging out, by the way, you know, you have to be, there are rules
[Guest]: about that. I just don't go and plonk myself in somebody's courtyard and just expect them
[Guest]: to go about their lives. That also doesn't happen. There are rules about how you behave.
[Guest]: And like I said, people are rightfully wary and rightfully cautious much more now in much
[Guest]: more in these past few years than ever, ever before. And so, you know, respecting people's
[Guest]: boundaries is something that I'm very careful about. I don't want to give you the, and I
[Guest]: know that you don't think this, but you know, I don't want to give the impression that I
[Guest]: just show up at somebody's house and refuse to leave until it suits me. I am a professional.
[Guest]: And I treat my, the people that I'm interviewing accordingly.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk about your writing process. Now, you know, you come from a background
[Amit Varma]: of reading literature, reading mostly fiction when you grew up and so on. Your first book
[Amit Varma]: is a novel. And then you take that kind of novelistic approach to your nonfiction as
[Amit Varma]: well. But the interesting thing that you also do in your nonfiction, which I absolutely
[Amit Varma]: love about your work is, and which is true of this book as well, is that you don't put
[Amit Varma]: your own opinions in your nonfiction, that you don't bring any preconceptions to it.
[Amit Varma]: Like I know journalists who will have a narrative set for them beforehand, that this is what
[Amit Varma]: it is going to be. And then the story they're reporting is whatever will fit the preconception
[Amit Varma]: that they already have. And from your books, it's clear that they're not. And even, you
[Amit Varma]: know, both the Good Girls and 13 Men, which was a short book before this, were both written
[Amit Varma]: in really clear prose. But at the same time, when you looked at the narrative, what happened
[Amit Varma]: wasn't so clear at all. It wasn't a simple narrative. It was complicated and messy and
[Amit Varma]: you let that be on the page. So how did you come to that process of finding your voice
[Amit Varma]: as a nonfiction writer?
[Guest]: So I think I'm really quite fierce about not inserting my opinions in my writing, unless
[Guest]: it's an opinion piece. I fight it quite hard when editors suggest that I should be in the
[Guest]: things that I write. I was asked to be in the Good Girls and it was not something that
[Guest]: I was going to do. So I believe in presenting information in a linear fashion and leaving
[Guest]: it to readers to come to their own conclusions. So that's something that I'm very clear about.
[Guest]: I mean, you can have very fierce opinions, as I do, and not force them down people's
[Guest]: throats. I simply don't enjoy that kind of writing and I don't do it either.
[Amit Varma]: Once you started writing nonfiction, who are then your models of narrative nonfiction writers
[Amit Varma]: that you're looking at and saying, this is a model for me, this is the kind of thing
[Amit Varma]: I'd like to do? Or, you know, where do you get this ethic from, for example?
[Guest]: So I think you know this, I did not read any nonfiction until my late 20s. And the person
[Guest]: who introduced me to my first book of narrative nonfiction is again, our friend Rahul Bhatia,
[Guest]: who's now making his second appearance in this conversation. Rahul had, if you recall,
[Guest]: a library full of the most extraordinary books, and they were all from American authors that
[Guest]: I had never heard of. And one day Rahul came to me and he said, Oh, you're really going
[Guest]: to like this book. And he presented me with a copy of a book called Random Family, by
[Guest]: Adrian Nicole LeBlanc. And Random Family is a piece of narrative nonfiction that's set
[Guest]: in the Bronx, and that investigates, well, doesn't investigate so much as follow a family
[Guest]: through their challenges with the drugs and poverty and their experiences of crime. And
[Guest]: I'd never read anything like that, because I'd never read narrative nonfiction. But the
[Guest]: experience I was left with was that I had learned so much, without feeling like I had
[Guest]: been taught anything. And the second experience that I was left with was that after I finished
[Guest]: the book, which I did in just a rush, I finally came up for air. And I thought that is such
[Guest]: a compelling technique. This, because I love studying. So I have a very academic mind,
[Guest]: I report, but I also love all the facts and figures, and the background, the socio-cultural
[Guest]: political background, and the challenges, how do you balance the two without making
[Guest]: your reader feel like you're forcing medicine down their throat. And this is particularly
[Guest]: challenging when two things, one, you are talking about a subject that is constantly
[Guest]: being talked about. So readers in this case, for example, sexual violence, so readers don't
[Guest]: necessarily feel that they're going to get anything by reading your book. And the second
[Guest]: thing is that, you know, they think, yeah, this is going to be too hard. I just can't,
[Guest]: I don't want to. And, but they have to, you have to make sure that that happens. And everything
[Guest]: comes from the correct placement of information. So narrative structure is actually the foundation
[Guest]: of my writing. And, but the idea that this was a possibility came to me from reading
[Guest]: Adrian's book. But after I read Adrian's book, I started reading some other nonfiction,
[Guest]: and then I stopped. Because a lot of narrative nonfiction is the American style of magazine
[Guest]: writing that is very formulaic. And, you know, when I am writing for one of those magazines,
[Guest]: that's how I have to write. But when I'm writing my own book, I don't have to follow those
[Guest]: methods. And so I avoid reading those kind of books when I'm writing or when I'm reporting,
[Guest]: because I simply don't want that voice. Because I think the most important thing that a writer
[Guest]: brings is their own voice. So while being influenced by earlier works, I'm also very
[Guest]: careful not to immerse myself in any kind of writing because I don't want it to have
[Guest]: that strong an effect on me.
[Amit Varma]: So when you talk about that kind of formulaic way of approaching a narrative nonfiction
[Amit Varma]: that's common in American journalism, can you elaborate a bit on that? What do you mean
[Amit Varma]: by that?
[Guest]: Well, you know, it starts with, I was in the field one morning, you know, the sky was pink,
[Guest]: the birds were chirping, and there's a paragraph with all the feels, right? And all your strong
[Guest]: emotions. And then you step back, it's a dance. If you look at any magazine article, and by
[Guest]: the way, I'm so guilty of this, I am remorseless about talking about it, because of course,
[Guest]: I'm as much as a perpetrator. So you know, you have all the feels, and then you step
[Guest]: back, right? And then you give facts, or history, and then again, you step in, and you have
[Guest]: all the feels. So it's a dance you do. It is literally a dance that you do. And if you
[Guest]: try and not do this dance, in your draft, I assure you that your editor will come back
[Guest]: and make you do the dance, you know, because that is how a lot of people in American newsrooms
[Guest]: have figured out that they can give their readers their medicine by going back and forth.
[Guest]: And I think it's effective, you know, but it's also the reason that I don't read long
[Guest]: form. And I just don't read it, because I just know what I'm going to get, you know,
[Guest]: and this pursuit of one way of doing things, the American way, the American magazine way
[Guest]: of doing things, which we as freelancers must do, if we want to write, often, if we want
[Guest]: to tell the stories we want to tell for a large audience, it is to some extent killing
[Guest]: the form. And it certainly kills it for me in terms of my own, you know, the reading
[Guest]: that I do for my own pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: You know, this is, again, another question I was saving for later. But since we've come
[Amit Varma]: to it, I'll ask it now that you know, when I used to write op-eds and opinion pieces,
[Amit Varma]: again, more than a decade ago for the likes of the Wall Street Journal or the Guardian
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, I actually hated it. Because you're writing for a foreign audience, you
[Amit Varma]: have to kind of put clauses and explain everything. If you're writing BJP, you have to have BJP
[Amit Varma]: comma, the blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And it just seems like a lot of dumbing down of
[Amit Varma]: the content, whereas with an Indian audience, I can make assumptions about that they know
[Amit Varma]: the same background information as I do and get to the heart of the matter. Now, in your
[Amit Varma]: case, what are the sort of expectations that you fight when you do your writing? Like a
[Amit Varma]: ton of your writing is, you know, journalism for foreign magazines, for example, whether
[Amit Varma]: you're doing features or reportage of this kind. And there, there would be A, expectations
[Amit Varma]: of style, what you just mentioned, because you're used to that kind of formulaic approach,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it. B, there would be expectations from the content itself, because they would
[Amit Varma]: have, you know, sometimes possibly exotic notions of what the content will lead to,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes, you know, simplistic notions of what the content will lead to. While, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so how do you deal with that? Is that a frustration that sometimes get in the way?
[Amit Varma]: And C, there would also be a question of language. Like, you know, one of the complaints that
[Amit Varma]: you've had about our media, and I remember you've mentioned this during the Vidarbha
[Amit Varma]: time, is that they're not replicating the dialect and the kind of feel of the language
[Amit Varma]: that people there use. And in your work, you've tried to kind of capture that, that local
[Amit Varma]: flavor and all of that as well. But at the same time, it's a bit of a balancing act,
[Amit Varma]: because a significant percentage of your audience, even for books like this, will be westernized
[Amit Varma]: audience. And you know, then you have to, you know, is there a balancing act that you
[Amit Varma]: then have to do? So how much does this notion of what is the audience play into your writing?
[Guest]: So again, I go back to the girl, you know, my first book, which nobody read. And I just
[Guest]: have nobody's going to read anything I write, I can be really disappointed that the career has
[Guest]: come to this, or I can see, see freedom in it. And that's exactly what happened with
[Guest]: Beautiful Thing. And you know, Beautiful Thing is full of Hindi. And there are some stylistic
[Guest]: decisions that I made with the language that I might not make now. But I was as true as I
[Guest]: wanted to be with that book, because I felt that, and I didn't have a western audience in mind,
[Guest]: I didn't have an Indian audience in mind, I just wrote the book that I wanted to do. And I think
[Guest]: that that was the best thing that I could have done for myself. And I've continued to do it.
[Guest]: And by the way, if you go to Goodreads, which you shouldn't, but if you do, and you look at the,
[Guest]: you know, the reviews for Beautiful Thing, basically, everybody who isn't in India says
[Guest]: they didn't understand our book. And why is there so much in Hindi? And why are there no
[Guest]: translations? And I do sympathize, nobody wants to read a book in where there's so many foreign
[Guest]: words. But, you know, that is how people speak. And I can't be thinking of people in various
[Guest]: parts of the world when I'm writing, you just can't do that yourself. You know, we have to
[Guest]: follow rules all the time in every aspect of our lives, at least when we write, we must allow
[Guest]: ourselves to be free. And with The Good Girls, I had the most extraordinary editors, and I don't
[Guest]: remember, I don't think there was one occasion where somebody says, can you translate? Can you
[Guest]: not use this word in Hindi? Or can you explain more? Or I don't think a Western audience would
[Guest]: understand it. What I wanted to write, I wrote. And, you know, that is also luck of the draw.
[Guest]: And that is also perhaps where I am in terms of my career. Early on, when I would pitch to
[Guest]: American magazines, I couldn't find a home because of how I write. And the fact that I
[Guest]: don't want to change how I write. But now, more recently, when I've written for magazines like
[Guest]: Harper's, or the California Sunday Magazine, you know, I could, they get me and nobody says,
[Guest]: explain. And I think that's also because people have, the thinking has changed. You know, we know
[Guest]: the word Americans in newsrooms, and I'm speaking specifically of the ones that I have had
[Guest]: professional relationships with, no longer believe that everything needs to be seen from an American
[Guest]: perspective. They recognize that the world is far more interesting, because it is different
[Guest]: and diverse. So I think I have been lucky, but it's also because of where I am right now.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's good to hear. My next question is kind of about your writing process, like when I teach
[Amit Varma]: an online writing course, and invariably during the course, somebody or the other will ask me
[Amit Varma]: about my approach to multiple drafts. And I will always talk about you there. Because one of the
[Amit Varma]: things that blew me away about Beautiful Thing was that, you know, being privileged enough to be
[Amit Varma]: your friend in those times, I got to read all those drafts. And they were all different from
[Amit Varma]: each other. It wasn't like you wrote one draft, and then you changed a few paras here and there,
[Amit Varma]: and you shortened a few sentences or anything like that. Every single draft was completely
[Amit Varma]: different from any other draft, you were starting with, you know, focusing on different characters,
[Amit Varma]: maybe you were just moving the structure around completely. And I would find that impossible to
[Amit Varma]: do. Because once you begin with a certain conception of the book, I would anchor myself to
[Amit Varma]: some kind of, you know, base structure of the book or what it's about. And you were just open to just
[Amit Varma]: mutilating yourself again and again, and starting from scratch. And that ethic just continues to
[Amit Varma]: blow me away when I think about it. You know, like one, how do you get that kind of distance
[Amit Varma]: and objectivity to look at something you've written, and be able to say that, no, this is
[Amit Varma]: shit, which is normally something that comes after a bit of distance, to be able to see the problems
[Amit Varma]: with it and say that, no, you know, I need to do it again, I don't need to tinker, I need to do it
[Amit Varma]: again. And you just did this repeatedly. So what was that like? And were there learnings about
[Amit Varma]: structure, which you just mentioned is so important to you during that phase of writing
[Guest]: the beautiful thing? So I recognize the kind of subjects that I am interested in,
[Guest]: may not be easy for people to read about. But I do think that it's important to,
[Guest]: for them to read about these things. And so one of the focuses of my work when I'm writing
[Guest]: is to make the language as clear as possible, to maintain the momentum and focus on small,
[Guest]: focus on small, small things, you know, the endings of paragraphs, the endings of chapters,
[Guest]: every chapter has to end in a way that compels you right away to turn the page and start a new
[Guest]: chapter. I want you to keep moving on until you reach the very end. So that's something that I'm
[Guest]: very, very committed to. You know, style matters to me. But that never happens in the first three
[Guest]: drafts of a book. It just simply doesn't, Amit. And you know, one of the things that also doesn't
[Guest]: happen is that knowledge doesn't come in the first three drafts for me. And I'm sure it must be
[Guest]: different for other writers. It's simply that it takes years to finally be at that point in the
[Guest]: writing of a book or the reporting of a book where I think, oh, I get it. I get the story.
[Guest]: And with The Good Girls, that didn't happen until at the earliest within three years.
[Guest]: You know, the first draft of the book was so bad that I really think of my editors and think,
[Guest]: how come they didn't just, you know, quietly cancel the contract and just leave me to my
[Guest]: devices? The second draft was somehow I put in years more work and somehow managed to produce
[Guest]: something even worse. And I have a lovely editor here in London called Alexandra Pringle. She's,
[Guest]: you know, iconic editor at Bloomsbury. And she called me for a meeting one afternoon in her
[Guest]: office. And she's just lovely. She's just so polite. And she's so kind. And one of the things
[Guest]: she said was, you know, I think you've done all the work. I just think that you need to relax
[Guest]: and have a little bit of fun with this. And I couldn't believe it because I was like, no,
[Guest]: no, you don't understand. I've been doing this for like four, four and a half years.
[Guest]: I finished it. I had fun. I really did. Please publish the book. But I couldn't understand what
[Guest]: she meant. And I think what it was, was that she says, you know, you're so, I'm so earnest,
[Guest]: which is true. I'm an extremely earnest person, constantly trying even in my work to show you my
[Guest]: work, to make sure that you understand that everything has been covered, all vases have
[Guest]: been covered. You are in safe hands. But what Alexandra said to me at that point, when I
[Guest]: expected to be published within months was, I think you need to, one way to solve this is to
[Guest]: just write, rewrite the first chapter, just go home and give me a new chapter. And I think that
[Guest]: was the first time in my life where I was resistant to doing a rewrite because I do them all the time.
[Guest]: I consider it part of my job to just keep rewriting things, you know, and I actually sat and thought
[Guest]: about it for a month and I spoke to some people and I just said, I can't do it. I've invested
[Guest]: so many years. I can't tinker with it because, you know, a narrative is, is like a house of cards.
[Guest]: You know, you move one thing and the house of cards collapses. And, but after that month of
[Guest]: mulling past, I went back to work in my office, which is by the way, a table at a Costa coffee
[Guest]: shop on the high street, close to where we live. So I went back to my table in Costa and I remember
[Guest]: agree, I said, okay, I'm going to rewrite the first chapter. And I remember sitting down there
[Guest]: and writing, you know, their names were Padma Lalli and then just realising, oh,
[Guest]: I should just rewrite the whole book. That will solve the problem. And I was right. And that did
[Guest]: solve the problem. And I did rewrite the whole book and it's not hard. It's like running, you
[Guest]: know, I run and like the first few kilometres is so, so hard, but then, then you know what to do
[Guest]: and it happens. And so that's what happened even with the good girls that I reached the point where
[Guest]: I could rewrite the book repeatedly, even close to publication, because that's just how I have now,
[Amit Varma]: I have trained myself, I suppose. That sounds absolutely insane. I've got to kind of
[Amit Varma]: reassure all my listeners that not only do most writers not have that kind of discipline to write
[Amit Varma]: something four or five times or wait four years to find its voice, but all my episodes are also
[Amit Varma]: recorded only once we just get one shot at it. And you know, what I loved about the structure
[Amit Varma]: of the good girls, and I have to tell you that because the subject is so dark, that I was a
[Amit Varma]: little scared of reading it because I, you know, I just thought that this will be sort of a tough
[Amit Varma]: book to read just because of what the subject is. But the way you've structured it, the way
[Amit Varma]: you've told the story, like the first thing I noticed about it was how it consists of a whole
[Amit Varma]: bunch of small, small, small, small chapters, like each chapter is two pages or three pages,
[Amit Varma]: it just keeps you reading on. There isn't that formulaic dance happening where you have fields
[Amit Varma]: in detail or whatever. Instead, everything is like a slow march forward. You have more and more,
[Amit Varma]: you have things happening all the time, details filling in. And it just kept me reading till the
[Amit Varma]: end. I mean, I just read it in one sitting, not because I had to for work, but because I couldn't
[Amit Varma]: put it down. It was, it's almost like what you once said about beautiful thing which you described
[Amit Varma]: as quote, a terribly tragic story that refused to be tragic. Stop quote. And in some senses,
[Amit Varma]: this kind of wasn't that dark and grim. And at the same time, it was darker and grimmer than
[Amit Varma]: what you would expect, because it's a story about so much other than just sort of a couple of
[Amit Varma]: murders. So did your earlier drafts, which by the way, I refuse to believe were crap, I'm sure they
[Amit Varma]: were extremely readable as well. But did your earlier drafts also have this kind of a structure
[Amit Varma]: with short chapters? Or is this something that you arrived at for this one? The first draft,
[Guest]: I think, I messed up the momentum completely. So the first draft moved so quickly that you didn't
[Guest]: have time to think about anything. You didn't have time to absorb any information. You finished the
[Guest]: book, and you sat there thinking what the heck just happened, and not in a good way. I don't
[Guest]: remember if the chapters were this short. And in fact, I have to say that I didn't know, realize
[Guest]: the chapters were this short until a few months ago, when I received the copy edits, and I had
[Guest]: the actual pages in my hand. And I thought, oh, my gosh, some of the chapters are two pages.
[Guest]: Because for me, it just seemed like all this information, years of information. And I didn't
[Guest]: realize that it looked like that. So in the first draft, I got the momentum wrong. And I also didn't
[Guest]: have information. So I wrote the first draft within the first two years, I did not have
[Guest]: information. I thought that I did, I didn't. So the first draft bears very little resemblance
[Guest]: to the finished book. In the second draft, you know, I thought that I should write a big book,
[Guest]: a book not big in size, but a book of I don't know what I was thinking.
[Guest]: I early on when when my agent tried to sell Beautiful Thing in the UK and the US, a lot of
[Guest]: publishers came back and said, but this is just a book about some dancers in Bombay. It's a small
[Guest]: book about little people. And it's just not like an India book. And I wonder if I absorb that
[Guest]: criticism and which now by the way, I completely disagree with and felt like I have to write a
[Guest]: and felt like I have to write this big India book. So I did so much research that at one point,
[Guest]: you know, I'm talking about what Badaiu was like in the Bronze Age. So you know, I went like all
[Guest]: the way in the opposite direction having spent wasted so much time in archives here in London,
[Guest]: digging up the history of Badaiu and then looking at all the old papers and, you know,
[Guest]: understanding what Katra Saadat Ganj used to be like 100 years ago. And so then that happened.
[Guest]: And then I had my conversation with Alexandra. And then I got to where we are right now. And
[Guest]: then it happened naturally, because I really do believe that there is no way to escape,
[Guest]: to circumvent those initial years, you know, you have to go through the struggle to reach a point
[Amit Varma]: where everything comes together. Wow. And how did you arrive at this specific book? And also,
[Amit Varma]: how do you pick the things that you report on like steadfastly throughout your, you know,
[Amit Varma]: since you started writing, you know, serious narrative nonfiction, you've, you know, you've
[Amit Varma]: written about women, you've almost in a sense written not just about women, but about invisible
[Amit Varma]: women in India, who would otherwise be outside the gaze of the mainstream media. And what you
[Amit Varma]: did in this case was you picked actually what was a pretty high profile case. And yet you thrust
[Amit Varma]: aside all the narratives about it that might have existed in the media, that this happened,
[Amit Varma]: or that happened. And then you went in from scratch, and you just dove in. So how did it
[Amit Varma]: happen? Like, is there, for example, now, this leitmotif in your work that this is the kind of
[Amit Varma]: work that I want to do, these are the subjects that really interest me. And then within that
[Amit Varma]: sort of frame of possibilities, how did this particular case in this particular book grab
[Guest]: your attention? I'm not interested in power at all. I'm not interested in powerful people.
[Guest]: And I say that because, you know, I write about politics, and I write about police.
[Guest]: And I write about people with with pull and people with status, but they don't interest me.
[Guest]: And I just, it's the people at the opposite end that interest me. And it's always been that way.
[Guest]: And I think it might just come from having been a girl and a woman in India, and seeing
[Guest]: how people viewed me. And seeing how people view girls and women in general, constantly
[Guest]: undermining them, constantly underestimating them, constantly shushing them, speaking over them,
[Guest]: thinking that their opinions don't matter. And I think I obviously disagree with that opinion.
[Guest]: And I feel very, very strongly about listening to people whose opinions aren't solicited.
[Guest]: I just tend to find them more interesting. And it's just the powerlessness. Because, you know,
[Guest]: if you're powerless in a place like India, I mean, life is just so, it's so impossible.
[Guest]: It's so painful. It's so cruel. I can't, I can't bear it. I have such a visceral, even now,
[Guest]: I mean, like, I'm literally crying. I have such a visceral reaction to it. I can't believe how
[Guest]: we expect to live in a certain way. And we do not think other people should be allowed to live like
[Guest]: that. You know, the idea that you can go to Qatar and people don't have drinking water,
[Guest]: they don't have power, they have to use the fields. How is this acceptable? How are we pretending
[Guest]: that Qatar, just because it's a village in Uttar Pradesh, means nothing. And in fact,
[Guest]: it does mean nothing because, you know, one of the women in the book says this. She says,
[Guest]: do our children mean nothing to the rich, to the powerful? And I'm afraid the answer is yes,
[Guest]: they don't. And I simply cannot, I simply cannot understand how this is an acceptable response
[Guest]: to the state of our world. And I think that, you know, my books, they lack opinion. My books don't
[Guest]: tell you how I feel, because I genuinely don't think that my thoughts, my feelings, my opinions
[Guest]: are of any interest and it should not concern you. You should concern yourself with the facts.
[Guest]: Don't pay attention to the reporter, right? But I will say that behind these things,
[Guest]: there are certainly profound feelings, because otherwise, I can't do it, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's take a quick commercial break and come back and talk more about the book.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen. I'm chatting with Sonia Falero about her wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book, The Good Girls. And after speaking about Sonia for the first half of the show, we finally
[Amit Varma]: get down to talking about the book. And one of the sort of the delightful things I noticed about the
[Amit Varma]: book was that it has just the right amount of descriptive detail. For example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: at one point you're talking about, you're describing someone staying in Noida and you
[Amit Varma]: talk about how the walls of the building shook when trucks rumpled past. At another point,
[Amit Varma]: you're describing like the cops at the station and you write, quote, attired in nightclothes,
[Amit Varma]: the five police officers were sprawled on charpoys, legs outstretched and potbellies heaving,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And later on, you write about how a journalist called Chaturvedi is on his way to the
[Amit Varma]: scene of the action. And you write, quote, as Chaturvedi spread forward, he saw a man a few
[Amit Varma]: feet ahead lying in the middle of the road, his open eyes looking up at the sky. He was very
[Amit Varma]: likely drunk, but perhaps he was dead. And Chaturvedi swerved to avoid hitting him,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, which is a delightful light moment. And obviously, you're having fun at a different
[Amit Varma]: point. You write, you know, you talk about, you know, how Ganga Singh is telling you,
[Amit Varma]: the inspector who's called from a nearby town to the scene and Ganga Singh is trying to impress
[Amit Varma]: upon you how much of a hurry he was in. So he says, quote, I didn't do Colgate, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And one, how do you, like to get these details means you're looking for these details also.
[Amit Varma]: You're building this tapestry of observations. You're kind of obviously writing them down
[Amit Varma]: somewhere and then you're weaving it in. So what's your process like? Because then you're
[Amit Varma]: being observant at multiple levels during the reporting of the story. So how do you kind of
[Guest]: approach all of this? I record everything. I can record for hours on end. I've had recordings that
[Guest]: are six hours long, eight hours long, but I don't rely primarily on the recordings. I mean,
[Guest]: I rely on them for the accuracy of a quote. But I think that my notes play just as important a role
[Guest]: because in my notes, I write about, you know, exactly the things that you talk about, what
[Guest]: somebody's dressed like, what are their facial expressions, what is the environment in which
[Guest]: they're working? What are the sounds that you can hear? What are their mannerisms? So I write and
[Guest]: record at the same time. And because I'm generally around people for as long as is appropriate and
[Guest]: respectful, then I also get time to process my thoughts in that moment. You know, if somebody
[Guest]: leaves the room for a bit, then I get to process things and think about what I need to do next,
[Guest]: what questions I need to ask, what observations I need to make. So that happens. I just try and
[Guest]: I like detail. I like to read detail. I absorb detail. And, you know, it's something that is
[Guest]: important to my work. But I do also, I do like descriptions that go on and on, because I think
[Guest]: that they take the reader away from the story. And they're very rarely necessary. I mean,
[Guest]: I think that I don't think there's anybody who can't be summed up in more than a sentence or two.
[Guest]: You know, you can tell so much about a person in just a few words. So that is how I work.
[Guest]: But I do think that so much of it also happens much later in the drafts, because, you know,
[Guest]: there's the sifting through the information and making sure that you only use as much
[Guest]: as you need. You don't weigh down your story. That's very important.
[Amit Varma]: You know, some of the kind of early passages that struck me in your book also lay out beautifully,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what the role of everyone in this story is. And I'll read out a couple of these. And
[Amit Varma]: one in the first part of your book, you write, quote, the men of Qatar spent almost all day in
[Amit Varma]: the fields. The children studied here since a good school which taught English was near the orchard.
[Amit Varma]: In the evenings when the edge of the clouds softened and blurred and a cool breeze rippled
[Amit Varma]: through the crops, women came back down from the village to draw water and socialize.
[Amit Varma]: Boys teach the limping dogs and the limping dogs chased rats, girls huddled. The smell was heat,
[Amit Varma]: husks and buffalo droppings, stop quote. And later on, you write, quote, as the sun climbed,
[Amit Varma]: Padma and Lalli sat before their respective family herds, lighting dung cakes into a flaring heap,
[Amit Varma]: the heated oil and kneaded dough. They returned to the fields with roti-sabzi for the family
[Amit Varma]: members still toiling. They trudged back home to scrub the dishes with wood ash for soap.
[Amit Varma]: Off they went with their goats. Back they came to milk the buffaloes. They swept the courtyard.
[Amit Varma]: They washed the clothes. They jerked the heavy galvanized steel handle of the water pump up and
[Amit Varma]: down, up and down to fill a bucket of water to wash themselves. They prepared dinner. They swept
[Amit Varma]: the courtyard one more time. Then they did something. Then they did something else,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And I just thought this paragraph ends in such a masterful way. Then they did
[Amit Varma]: something. Then they did something else. You get a sense of sort of the mind numbing routine of
[Amit Varma]: these two girls who are 16 and 14 respectively. And this is an unspoken presence through the book,
[Amit Varma]: almost a protagonist. The fact that boys and girls, men and women live such different lives
[Amit Varma]: and are assigned such different roles that they might as well be in two separate worlds. And
[Amit Varma]: in one of those worlds, the people aren't human. You know, tell me a little bit about this. And
[Amit Varma]: of course we know this. It is there even in the cities. It is not as if the cities are extremely
[Amit Varma]: different or progressive or whatever. But just give me a sense of this sort of mahal, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: of Katra Sadatkanch, where, you know, your story is based.
[Guest]: So I went to Katra first in 2015. You know, back then, I mean, I was not planning to write
[Guest]: this kind of book. I, like everybody else, was really consumed by the news of sexual assaults
[Guest]: in the papers. And I wanted to write a book about what was being spoken of as a phenomenon,
[Guest]: as an epidemic of sexual assault. And I knew that it couldn't just be a book that wasn't anchored
[Guest]: in something that had happened. And because the case in Katra was said to be open and shut, I
[Guest]: thought that I would go to Katra, do a few interviews to say that I had done that, and
[Guest]: then come back to London and work on the actual book. And what I really noticed the first time
[Guest]: I went to Katra was that the men had a lot to say. I mean, the men were eager to talk,
[Guest]: they were warm and inviting, and they just went on and on. And I think that is something that is,
[Guest]: you know, when we say, oh, it's easy to get people to talk in India, or it's a reporter's
[Guest]: paradise, anyone will speak to you. What we actually mean is that it's easy to get men to
[Guest]: talk to you. You know, the women don't talk, because they have never been encouraged to talk
[Guest]: in mixed company or in the company of men. And they're used to being told literally to shut up.
[Guest]: As I heard, you know, one of the fathers, who is mentioned in the book repeatedly say to his wife,
[Guest]: chup kar, chup kar, tu chup kar. And this sense that, you know, the fathers are telling the story,
[Guest]: the fathers are the face of this, which is, to some extent, completely fair enough, because they
[Guest]: lost children. But the mothers, I hadn't heard speak, except to express, you know, a limited
[Guest]: number of sentiments over and over, to say, for example, you know, we won't, we won't rest until
[Guest]: we get justice. If we don't get justice, we'll kill ourselves. But beyond that, we hadn't heard
[Guest]: from them. And it just struck me when I went there that this is a village where women don't speak.
[Guest]: And they're everywhere. You know, they are right there kneading rotis. They're right there
[Guest]: sweeping the courtyard. They're right there washing clothes, grazing the buffalos,
[Guest]: shopping, working in the fields. They're everywhere. And they're all silent, they're
[Guest]: mute. And I found that really striking and, and really telling. And I don't think that
[Guest]: Katra is any better or worse than many places in India. But it certainly meant that it required
[Guest]: much more persistence and much more time to really get a sense of what the girls lives were and what
[Guest]: what might have become. And that was my first experience of Katra. And the second thing was,
[Guest]: of course, you know, you must always be wary when there is just the one spokesperson,
[Guest]: when there is just the one person wielding power. And this was certainly the case in the family of
[Guest]: the Shakya family that is at the centre of the book, where one person, Sohanlal, who is the
[Guest]: father of the younger girl, who I call Lalli, who was 14 years old at the time for death. Sohanlal
[Guest]: did all the talking, and nobody would speak in his presence. And as long as Sohanlal was around,
[Guest]: nobody would talk to me. And that meant that if I didn't find a way to break this, to change this
[Guest]: dynamic, then I would only be telling Sohanlal's story. And that is, that's not what I wanted to
[Guest]: do. So those were the challenges before me. Yeah, I was just rereading, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Yugantaba Airavati Karve, which talks about how in our epics of Mahabharata and Ramayana,
[Amit Varma]: you basically have men doing all the doing. The women are just people to whom things are happening,
[Amit Varma]: you know, almost like objects. And even in this book, it seems that all the action is driven
[Amit Varma]: forward by the men. And the women are kind of victims of it, like these two girls, but
[Amit Varma]: even beyond that, you know, and even when, you know, you think of the Shakyas and the Yadavs,
[Amit Varma]: who are sort of the two groups in the middle of this, it's almost like, you know, a century old
[Amit Varma]: caste conflict also playing itself out in the microcosm of the story. And even there, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: they are both victims. And, you know, the one act of agency that I remember, and that struck me from
[Amit Varma]: your book was when the bodies of the girls are hanging on the tree. And you describe how the
[Amit Varma]: women are then huddling just near it as if to protect those bodies with their bodies, which was
[Amit Varma]: a kind of a powerful image. How did you get past this then? Like, did you get the women to speak
[Amit Varma]: to you? Did you manage to get time with them? Or did you just have to navigate through these
[Guest]: different versions of these different men? So I don't think that I was able to have an
[Guest]: honest conversation with either of the children's mothers in the first two, maybe three years.
[Guest]: Because every time I showed up at their house in Qatar, even if I didn't request to speak to
[Guest]: Lali's father, Sofnal, or Padma's father, Jivanlal, somebody would go running to the fields
[Guest]: to call them. So, you know, I would enter a house that was empty of men, because men usually don't
[Guest]: stay in the house during the day, except perhaps sometimes to come and nap. They stay in the fields.
[Guest]: And it would be a house full of women. But immediately, the men would descend, and the
[Guest]: women would go silent. And it's very tricky to navigate yourself out of that situation.
[Guest]: How do you say, I want to speak in private? Because that's simply not something that is
[Guest]: done. It's not considered acceptable. And what changed was that I was just,
[Guest]: because I was around for so long, the men couldn't hang out with me anymore. You know,
[Guest]: so I would show up at the house and then somebody would go running to the fields and call the men,
[Guest]: and then I would be, I would wait for so long that the men would be like, yeah,
[Guest]: I mean, we have to go work. So you can just sit here. And that's really, that's really what
[Guest]: happened. But you know, I'm not saying that it's easy. And I don't want you to get the
[Guest]: impression that I was particularly successful. I think that if you spend your life as a woman
[Guest]: in places like Qatar, condemned to always keep your feelings and your thoughts to yourself,
[Guest]: I think it becomes a habit. I don't think you trust people with your thoughts, your ideas,
[Guest]: your opinions. And perhaps I just got the short version. That's very possible.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of the sort of, like, I found the politics of this place fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: not politics in the sense of UP politics and how that's playing out and who the MPs are and
[Amit Varma]: Akhilesh Yadav and all of that, even though they, you know, play little side roles in the story,
[Amit Varma]: but just the internal politics that the two main protagonist groups in this are the Shakyas and
[Amit Varma]: the Yadavs. And they're both sort of OBC groups. But, you know, the Yadavs at different times have
[Amit Varma]: been politically much more powerful, including at the time of the story when Akhilesh Yadav is
[Amit Varma]: sort of the chief minister, while the Shakyas traditionally, until this point, have
[Amit Varma]: voted for Mayawati's Bahujan Samaj Party. And it's kind of understood, therefore, that whoever
[Amit Varma]: is in power as such has a little bit of the upper hand. You point to that, you know, the saying in
[Amit Varma]: such places ki raat gayi baat gayi that, you know, there is no rule of law per se, you just have to
[Amit Varma]: kind of deal with it. So give me a sense of what this kind of dynamic is. And at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: what we find out about these particular Yadavs is that, you know, they are here in this place
[Amit Varma]: because they have also escaped great strife in the past, this particular group, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they are also victims and they continue to be victims through the story in a different kind
[Amit Varma]: of sense. So what was that politics like? How long did it take you to kind of understand all the
[Amit Varma]: dynamics of that? And essentially, the more I read the story, the more it became clear to me that
[Amit Varma]: what is really happening is shaped by this larger thing. It's not shaped by the actions of, say,
[Amit Varma]: one or two impetuous individuals who are doing whatever. It's just shaped by this larger
[Amit Varma]: context, which, of course, includes this caste rivalry and the misogyny we just discussed,
[Amit Varma]: but also so much else. So give me a bit about how, you know, layer by layer you, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: you've unpeeled it layer by layer in the book, but in your process of writing it, tell me what
[Amit Varma]: it was like and give my listeners a little sense of the setting of this whole story.
[Guest]: So that was the first time that I really got an insight into how important politics and
[Guest]: politicians and elections are to the people of this village was when one of Sohanlal's sons,
[Guest]: Virender, who was 19 when I met him, spoke of one of the Shakya politicians as our man. He's ours.
[Guest]: He's one of ours. He'll look after us. But essentially, he's our man. And I just thought
[Guest]: that was so fascinating. And, you know, he said it with a smile, he said with a sense of confidence.
[Guest]: And I don't think that I've heard, you know, a lot of people in, say, a place like Bombay,
[Guest]: do that about politicians, feel a sense of familiarity and connection, and not just
[Guest]: familiarity and connection, because they share an ideology, but a proximity, like a physical
[Guest]: proximity. Because in these villages, first of all, the only way to get anything done,
[Guest]: if a politician, your local MLA specifically, intervenes on your behalf. So if you want to
[Guest]: get a power connection, you want police to investigate a crime, you want your child to
[Guest]: get into a good school, you need a politician to intervene. And therefore, these relationships are
[Guest]: cultivated by the villagers. You know, the villagers like Sohanlal and Jeevanlal, they would
[Guest]: truck out to the home of their local politician on the back of a motorcycle or in a tractor,
[Guest]: and just spend the day there, you know, getting to know the politician's assistants,
[Guest]: perhaps even seeing the politician themselves. But these are relationships that people cultivate.
[Guest]: And the politicians go out of their way to cultivate these relationships as well. So the
[Guest]: MLA for Dattaganj constituency, which is where Katra village is located, he's a man called
[Guest]: Sinod Kumar Shakya, who, by the way, has now been expelled from his party for malfeasance. But,
[Guest]: you know, politicians understand or choose not to invest their time in making big changes. Either
[Guest]: they think it's too hard, or they just don't want to be bothered. What they focus on is the small
[Guest]: fixes, you know, and which is, and a small fix example is, you know, I've had a constituent
[Guest]: comes and says, I'm having trouble with my neighbor. He keeps moving the boundary line
[Guest]: of his plot. So can you do something about it? Now, it's not really something that you would
[Guest]: expect, you know, your local MLA to intervene in. But this is something that Sinod Kumar Shakya
[Guest]: would send his closest secretary, his most trusted secretary, all the way to Katra to solve.
[Guest]: And Sinod Kumar himself shows up, you would show up regularly in villages like Katra,
[Guest]: he hand out his calling card, ask his constituents to call him by his pet name,
[Guest]: which is Deepu Bhaiya, and say to them, call me anytime. And they would. I mean, I cannot imagine
[Guest]: living here in London, or even before in Bombay and Delhi, having my MPs or my MLA's mobile number,
[Guest]: you know, or just thinking that, oh my God, I've had a fight with my neighbor, I'm going to call
[Guest]: my MLA. It's, it's not, it's unthinkable. And yet, these relationships are real. In many places in
[Guest]: rural India, they are strong. And the narrative at the time of the Katra case was that politicians
[Guest]: were just showing up in Katra, and they were politicizing the whole situation and how typical.
[Guest]: And that is not at all what happened. What we don't understand is that the relationship
[Guest]: between politicians and people in villages such as Katra is long. It's deep. It is old. It's
[Guest]: profound. And the people of Katra sought out politicians at the first instance. And these
[Guest]: were not random politicians. These were people that they considered, you know, members of their
[Guest]: family. There was no politicizing. This was simply normal standard behavior. If I'm going to call my
[Guest]: MLA to resolve a dispute over my goat, then I'm certainly going to call my MLA to resolve to
[Guest]: investigate a terrible and deadly crime. So this is something that I did not know. And I understood
[Guest]: very quickly, which is that the Shakya family in Katra village has very close bonds with their
[Guest]: local politician. And by the way, you know, another angle, another narrative of this story was that
[Guest]: there was something sinister about either the Shakya's proximity to the politicians of their
[Guest]: caste or the Yadav's proximity to the politicians of their caste. There's absolutely nothing sinister
[Guest]: about it. This is how things are. I mean, people vote their caste. As we know, in Uttar Pradesh,
[Guest]: as the saying goes, they don't merely cast their vote. So they vote for people of their caste.
[Guest]: And this relationship with politicians gave them a sense of comfort and security and anchors them
[Guest]: in a world that is so fraught, that is so uncertain. And understanding it and understanding
[Guest]: what that relationship was like, what the give and take was, was certainly one of the most
[Guest]: interesting aspects of reporting this book. Yeah, I found it completely fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: both the competitive feudalism that exists and the fact that there's no governance at all, which is
[Amit Varma]: why you tend to depend on this piecemeal patronage. So you're calling your local guy and saying, you
[Amit Varma]: know, come fix my goat, somebody has been beating my goat up or whatever the case may be. And there
[Amit Varma]: are other sort of deeper social tensions, like just to sort of begin to go along the narrative
[Amit Varma]: of the book, the two girls the book is about, you've named them Padma and Lalli, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: we are not legally allowed to take names. And they are kids of Suhamlal and Jeevanlal, who are,
[Amit Varma]: you know, patriarchs of this large Shakya family. And at one point, one of their uncles,
[Amit Varma]: this very shady guy called Nazru, you know, comes back at night when, you know, the two girls have
[Amit Varma]: gone to sort of defecate in the open. And he comes back and he says, there are thieves in the field,
[Amit Varma]: and then all the men take off to the field. And then he tells him, no, no, that they weren't
[Amit Varma]: thieves in the field. But Pappu Yadav, this other protagonist, he has gone off with the two girls,
[Amit Varma]: and the girls are missing. And this sets him into a full blown panic. And yet the immediate family
[Amit Varma]: doesn't reveal to the fellow searchers, what exactly has happened just at the girls are
[Amit Varma]: missing. And there was this very sort of telling paragraph by you. But I love this para and it
[Amit Varma]: says so much, and I'll ask you to elaborate on it. And you write quote, and so just like that,
[Amit Varma]: in less than an hour since they were gone, Padma was no longer the quick tempered one.
[Amit Varma]: Lalli was no longer the faithful partner in crime, who they were and what had happened to them
[Amit Varma]: was already less important than what their disappearance meant to the status of the people
[Amit Varma]: left behind. Stop quote. And elaborate on this a bit that already it is not just about an alarmed
[Amit Varma]: family worried about the welfare of their two girls. It's already become something more than
[Guest]: that. You know? Yeah, look, I mean, I always feel the need to say the obvious, which is that these
[Guest]: children were beloved to their parents, as children are, their parents adored them. But,
[Guest]: you know, life in a village like Katra is very different from life where you and I may live,
[Guest]: because there is no individual agency virtually. And we seem to think that this is something that
[Guest]: is specific to girls and women when, while it's true that boys and men have more freedoms,
[Guest]: they also are anchored to a vast number of rules that dictate how they are to behave.
[Guest]: And for them, those rules determine their place in the village, their status in the village,
[Guest]: their happiness, their peace of mind, and ultimately their survival. So what we have is,
[Guest]: in a sense, a police state, you know, that is actually what a place like Katra is.
[Guest]: People are policed by all the usual agencies, but they're also policed by each other,
[Guest]: and they police each other. And everybody, in a way, depends on the other person for their
[Guest]: survivor. We think in India that, you know, your actions are monitored or policed by the family,
[Guest]: and that the family is considering its honor. But actually, it's much bigger than that,
[Guest]: because the family isn't just thinking about their honor, they are thinking of
[Guest]: their community, in this case, their clan, their village. So there's this enormous sense
[Guest]: of responsibility, a burden that everybody is carrying. And even at a terrible and desperate
[Guest]: time, a time that no parent can ever imagine, which is the disappearance of a child,
[Guest]: I do understand that Jeevanlal and Sohanlal would think about how this would look,
[Guest]: how it would be interpreted, how they would be judged, what treatment would be meted out to them.
[Guest]: Because we do know this, that people are isolated for much smaller things, you know. And it was
[Guest]: possible that under certain circumstances, the other villagers might stop doing business with
[Guest]: them, might stop socializing with them, might refuse to cross the threshold of their house for
[Guest]: a cup of water or a plate of food. And these are things that they have to take into consideration.
[Guest]: It is simply life. It is not that one parent is less loving than the other, or one parent is more
[Guest]: obsessed with social status than the other. It is not that. It is simply that this is
[Amit Varma]: the reality of life. Yeah, I mean, in a sense, everybody's
[Amit Varma]: a victim. It's not like X or Y are the bad guys, but everybody's kind of a victim.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of fascinating minor role, or not such a minor role, but a small role,
[Amit Varma]: but an important role in the story is, you know, the one inclusion that modernity makes into it,
[Amit Varma]: which is that of the mobile phone. And on one hand, it's obviously, you know,
[Amit Varma]: indicative of the way women are considered that, you know, somebody in the village gets upset when
[Amit Varma]: he sees Padma Lalli talking on a mobile phone, because he is like, girls should not have phones,
[Amit Varma]: because then, you know, it helps them on the route towards greater agency, they will start
[Amit Varma]: talking to more people and all of that. And later, you discover that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of their fathers bought them the phone and you're like, fine, you know, what an enlightened
[Amit Varma]: person and that's, of course, Jeevan Lal buying the phone for Padma.
[Amit Varma]: And then you discover, you know, towards the end that, you know, that when he bought the phone,
[Amit Varma]: he deliberately bought a phone which has a recording facility where the calls are getting
[Amit Varma]: recorded. And that also, you know, plays an important part later on in the story.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting that, you know, we city people don't think of phones in this way,
[Amit Varma]: but a phone becomes such a significant thing. First, it's like, you know, representation of
[Amit Varma]: the mobility and empowerment, you don't want to give a woman and then it becomes a tool of
[Amit Varma]: suppression where you're almost like spying on your little girl and all of that. And it kind of
[Amit Varma]: plays a big part in the story. How did all of this kind of start emerging? Like, at what point did you
[Amit Varma]: realize that, you know, the phone plays such an important part in the story as indeed it does?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I won't give away how the whole thing ends or whatever. But, you know, in a pre-phone era,
[Amit Varma]: everything would have played out so differently. Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: I don't remember the exact moment. I don't even know that at any point during my reporting,
[Guest]: I saw a woman in the Shakya family use a phone. But I did learn early on that the mothers
[Guest]: didn't use phones unless a phone was handed to them with somebody actually on the line,
[Guest]: because they don't recognize numbers or letters. And they were extremely unfamiliar with phones.
[Guest]: They could just take calls. But I did know that their children enjoyed using phones,
[Guest]: were very familiar with them. And they used phones like teenagers anywhere else in India.
[Guest]: And in fact, many other parts of the world use phones. They used phones to have fun.
[Guest]: They used phones to communicate with their loved ones. They used phones as just for the pleasure
[Guest]: of having something that was special and fancy and expensive, that they could say
[Guest]: they had access to that they could flaunt. And it was just for them, I think it was just a way
[Guest]: to feel like who they were. They were just kids, they were teenagers. And they were at that age in
[Guest]: their lives, Padmanabhan Lalli, when they really had to break free from their family. You know,
[Guest]: we've all been through that stage. And we all know what it's like when the most important thing in
[Guest]: the world is not the company of your mom and dad. It is the company of your peers. It is not your
[Guest]: parents with whom you want to share secrets. It's your peers. And one way of connecting with your
[Guest]: peers is with technology. And that's how they used it. Tell me a little bit about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so this has happened, that they go looking for these girls, and then they go to the cops. Now,
[Amit Varma]: you've also given at different parts of the book an evocative description of what the police set
[Amit Varma]: up in the village is like, which is when you know, one begins to understand in a deeper way,
[Amit Varma]: why there is no governance, and why they all depend on the piecemeal patronage of politicians,
[Amit Varma]: because the police system is so messed up. So tell me a little bit about what is, how is the
[Amit Varma]: rule of law in this village? What are the policemen like? What's going on there?
[Guest]: So, you know, if you just showed up in the village, and you saw the chokhi had five police
[Guest]: officers, you think, well, that's really good. Five police officers for a village that's not
[Guest]: particularly big, that has no history of major crimes, that, you know, everybody belongs to
[Guest]: the same caste, virtually, and everyone is of the same socioeconomic background. So you know,
[Guest]: that obviously reduces the potential for strife, which is the whole purpose of this sort of
[Guest]: grouping, you would think, well, that's pretty good. But actually, those five police officers
[Guest]: had to police more than 40 villages, and they had no support. You know, they had no landline,
[Guest]: they had no computer, they had no car, they used their own phones and their own motorcycles,
[Guest]: and they were not compensated for that. They were only compensated for the use of bicycles.
[Guest]: And although it wasn't a reporting chokhi, which means that they did not have the power to file
[Guest]: an FIR, there were times when, you know, in any one of these villages, a serious crime would happen,
[Guest]: and they would be the first responders. And first responders with virtually no training,
[Guest]: first responders with no resources, what can they do, really? Even if they want to do something,
[Guest]: what can they do? And it must be said that, you know, you do this kind of job long enough,
[Guest]: and you don't actually want to do anything. You don't feel like you have any part to play.
[Guest]: And even if you did, you don't want to play it. And I think that's what it was with this
[Guest]: group of five men, you know, they were all painted as being enormously antagonistic,
[Guest]: that they went out of their way to harass, virtually torture the family of the children.
[Guest]: But in my experience, Amit, and very much with this book, you know, people are much more likely
[Guest]: not to care, than to care to the point where they are doing something bad to you, you know,
[Guest]: and it's not caring. This lethargy is really what triggered and tends to trigger often problems.
[Guest]: So, you know, you had a group of cops who are lethargic, who are distant, not malevolent,
[Guest]: but that was enough. It was enough that they were just that bad.
[Amit Varma]: I think just as there is Hanlon's razor about not attributing to malice,
[Amit Varma]: what can be explained by stupidity, I can now coin something after you,
[Amit Varma]: which is Falero's razor, which is never attribute to ill will, what can be explained by apathy.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, as you pointed out, the apathy is completely understandable,
[Amit Varma]: because these cops show up, they're very far from the families, they don't have a place to stay,
[Amit Varma]: there's no toilet, they don't have a place to wash, there's, you know, there's absolutely
[Amit Varma]: nothing. One of them is sleeping in an abandoned school, one of them is sleeping in the courtyard
[Amit Varma]: outside, it's just a complete mess. And you know, how do they cope with it? They cope with it by
[Amit Varma]: being drunk all the time. And once in a while, when a case for about a missing goat comes up,
[Amit Varma]: they do what they have to, and they're kind of, you know, this becomes a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what the interesting thing about this case, and you've given plenty of statistics about crime
[Amit Varma]: and women in the book, which I won't quote, and which we don't really need to, we know what it's
[Amit Varma]: like in India. But, you know, there are a few sort of seminal cases, which pick up like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Nirbhaya, notably, for a variety of reasons. And then this also caught public attention,
[Amit Varma]: partly because of the image that went viral on Facebook of these two girls hanging. And at one
[Amit Varma]: point, you write that shortly after this happens, quote, the road to Katra was soon jammed with
[Amit Varma]: horse carts, motorbikes and tractors. The farmers brought their wives, their wives storted children,
[Amit Varma]: and some even carried guns. The visitors gazed up at the girls, larkiya tangi, girls hanging,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And already the circus has begun. But what is a critical factor in the circus
[Amit Varma]: continuing and this almost seems a masterstroke unwilling or otherwise by Sohamlal is the
[Amit Varma]: decision of the family not to allow the bodies to come down. Tell me a little bit about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the thinking behind this and why it made so much sense and what was for them and what was driving
[Amit Varma]: them towards, you know, this kind of a decision of letting the girls hang there in the sun and
[Amit Varma]: not letting the cops nearby or anybody nearby as a, you know, what led to it?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think this was the single most important decision that the family took. And it just shows
[Guest]: how well they understand this society in which they belong, and how poorly everybody misjudged
[Guest]: them. You know, from the media to the politicians who showed up, everybody looked gazed upon them
[Guest]: and said, Oh, these poor simple folk, we need to help them. But nobody understood the pursuit of
[Guest]: justice and what can possibly make it happen better than people who have spent their entire lives
[Guest]: seeking justice for one thing or the other. I mean, somebody like me has nothing to tell them
[Guest]: that they didn't already know. And it was so, so brave, so strategic. It was so profoundly
[Guest]: moving. Also, and the decision simply came from the sense that their children were dead. They
[Guest]: needed to find out what had happened. The police in the Chowki couldn't be trusted to solve the
[Guest]: disappearance of a goat. Therefore, people have to come in to investigate the case. And the only
[Guest]: way to get those people, whoever those people may be, is to protest. And they had learned the
[Guest]: language of protest from the protests that followed the 2012 Delhi bus rape. You know, news
[Guest]: of that rape, the impact and the outcome of the protests that reached so many corners of the
[Guest]: country, where I've reported from, and it also reached Gujarat. And the lesson that the Shakya
[Guest]: family took from the protest was that it matters. Raising your voice, putting your foot down,
[Guest]: doesn't matter who you are, doesn't matter where you are. It matters. Because what it does is that
[Guest]: it attracts attention. And it attracts the media. And the politicians care about the media.
[Guest]: Politicians and the police don't care about anybody, but they care about the media. And
[Guest]: they care about public shaming. And that is a very Indian thing. You know, that is a cultural
[Guest]: characteristic that we can tolerate a lot, but we don't want to be publicly shamed. We don't like
[Guest]: that humiliation. And that is ultimately what the family was going for. They wanted to create a
[Guest]: sense of shame among the people who mattered, so that they could just find out, the family could
[Guest]: just find out what had happened to their children. And, you know, I think, at one level, people
[Guest]: didn't give, the public didn't give the family credit for the thoughtful way in which they
[Guest]: approached the investigation. And on the other hand, I think that we also failed them because,
[Guest]: you know, you cannot put a family from a village like Katra-Sadakanch in front of a TV camera and
[Guest]: then just leave it at that. And then imagine that they're going to be able to tolerate that level
[Guest]: of scrutiny. So, yeah, I mean, I think there was so much more going on than anybody understood
[Guest]: at the time. And, you know, I was able to get a sense of it, because I came in so late. And I
[Guest]: think that there's a lot of value in being the person who shows up afterwards, much afterwards.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And, you know, in the moment, a journalist who landed up would just have
[Amit Varma]: found what you could call the fog of war, where there is just, you don't really know what is
[Amit Varma]: happening. And while they are masterful in sort of this particular sort of decision that we won't
[Amit Varma]: let the bodies down till the world takes us seriously and people do something about it,
[Amit Varma]: while that works, you know, Sohanlal also realizes at the same time that if the media come, you have
[Amit Varma]: to give them a sensational narrative. And that narrative is really driven by a couple of things.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, the testimonies and the constantly changing, conflicting testimonies
[Amit Varma]: about what happened where, you know, first he tries to train the girl's uncle to sort of talk
[Amit Varma]: about how Pappu and his brothers took the girls away. Then he tries to tell them that one of the
[Amit Varma]: inspectors was a Yadav and Pappu's father took the girls away and so on and so forth. Therefore,
[Amit Varma]: building that kind of narrative of gang rape, which is, you know, a sensational headline and
[Amit Varma]: building that narrative of victimhood and the media plays along. The media plays along in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that, first, I think it was Reuters who first misreported the Shakyas as Dalits, which,
[Amit Varma]: of course, they're not. They're OBCs like the Yadavs. And, you know, one of the police people,
[Amit Varma]: Gangwar, was also reported as a Yadav, which, of course, he wasn't. And these convenient narratives
[Amit Varma]: build up and then everybody wants to believe this to the point that when you get to the post-mortem
[Amit Varma]: stage, there's actually pressure on the untrained people doing the post-mortem to certify that the
[Amit Varma]: girls actually were raped. So, and even when you are going in, you know, you're going into the
[Amit Varma]: story very late, but these narratives are dominant. This is what everybody wants to believe,
[Amit Varma]: you know, or even in another case, like Arushi Talwar, where, you know, the cops in that case,
[Amit Varma]: of course, kind of did the opposite of what they did here. You know, here they uncovered some of
[Amit Varma]: the truth, but there they again build these powerful narratives of honor killing and all
[Amit Varma]: that, which then enter the popular imagination and there's nothing you can do. So when you went to
[Amit Varma]: sort of report on this case, these narratives were dominant, that if you fought these narratives,
[Amit Varma]: that this was a gang rape by the dominant Yadavs, then you could be accused of, you know, siding
[Amit Varma]: with the dominant caste here and all of that. And what does one do about the unvarnished truth then?
[Amit Varma]: So what was your sense of sort of peeling the layers off and seeing the actual story for what
[Guest]: it was? One day, you know, about, it's hard now, you know, to tell one year from the other, but
[Guest]: I think maybe two or three years into reporting the story, I was walking in the village with
[Guest]: Padma's father, Jeevan Lal, and we were just taking a walk and he stopped at a tall wooden
[Guest]: door and he said, this is my animal shelter. This is where on the night my children disappeared,
[Guest]: our children disappeared, Nazru came to tell me that Khet mein aadmi hai. And I remember that
[Guest]: moment so clearly. I remember being absolutely shocked, absolutely being rooted to the spot,
[Guest]: feeling the sun beating on my face, because that is not the story that I had read anywhere.
[Guest]: That is not the story that anyone had told me in the first couple of years. The story that I knew
[Guest]: until that time was that Nazru had gone running with the news to the Shakya house, the house
[Guest]: where the family lives on a single plot of land, where all 18 of them live in three demarcated
[Guest]: houses. So now I'm hearing that actually Nazru didn't go to the house, he came to the animal
[Guest]: shelter. And, you know, this is actually so significant. I mean, this is, on one hand,
[Guest]: this is where you can say the story starts. Of course, it's not true. Stories like this
[Guest]: never start on the night of the event, right? They start years before. But needless to say,
[Guest]: this particular story was supposed to have started from the time Nazru comes running from the fields,
[Guest]: bangs on the door of the Shakya house and says, khet mein aadmi hai. Thieves in the field,
[Guest]: thieves in the field. But now I'm hearing that actually he went to Jeevanlal's animal shelter.
[Guest]: And this is shocking for so many reasons. First of all, everybody has been telling one story
[Guest]: that is incorrect, factually incorrect, for years. So why would they do this? And what else is
[Guest]: incorrect about what I've been hearing? Secondly, because this fact of knocking on Jeevanlal's door
[Guest]: very specifically, as opposed to the family door, it tells you so much that you might not have known
[Guest]: otherwise. It tells you, for example, that Nazru, the cousin, Jeevanlal's first cousin,
[Guest]: knew where he was at a particular time of night. Because these men don't spend their day in the
[Guest]: animal shelter, they go there at specific times. So he knew Jeevanlal well enough to know that at
[Guest]: this specific time, Jeevanlal will be in his animal shelter. The other thing that we know
[Guest]: about this is that Nazru chose to tell Jeevanlal. He didn't choose to tell the whole family,
[Guest]: which would be the natural thing. He singled out one brother, one person, and said, I will give
[Guest]: this incredibly significant information to him. So by not getting this fact right, I learn,
[Guest]: I could have missed out on so much. But you know, what this actually teaches you is not that it's
[Guest]: not that the family members who, who repeatedly told the story of Nazru knocking on the family
[Guest]: house were lying. I don't believe they were lying. I think what happens is that if you know you're
[Guest]: going to tell the same story over and over, you, your mind simply makes your attempts to make it
[Guest]: everything easy for you, and tells you to tell the simplest version of the story. And therefore it
[Guest]: becomes much simpler for members of the family to say Nazru came to the house, rather than to say
[Guest]: Nazru went to the animal shelter. We have three animal shelters. He went to Jeevanlal's animal
[Guest]: shelter. It's not here. It's there. You know, they just made their life easier. But by doing that,
[Guest]: it led me to say, what else did they omit unknowingly? What other information am I not
[Guest]: getting? Because people are just trying to give me the shorthand. And from that time on, if I had
[Guest]: taken any piece of information for granted, I stopped. Because it was a really, really good
[Guest]: reminder to not assume anything. And to always ask people questions directly, and very specifically,
[Guest]: and repeatedly. Really, did he come to your house, this house? Or did he come somewhere else? And
[Guest]: then the moment, you know, that piece of information came out, then all the other little
[Guest]: pieces of information started coming out. Because also, a couple of things happen when you make it
[Guest]: clear that facts matter. What happens is that people start telling you the facts. So that
[Guest]: happened. So when I said, look, I didn't know this, I need to know what else happened, then
[Guest]: that's when you don't get the shorthand version. And also because you're not in a hurry, and people
[Guest]: understand that you're not in a hurry, then it changes everything. But that was a defining moment
[Amit Varma]: for me in the reporting. Yeah, I mean, why was it significant though that he, I mean, apart from the
[Amit Varma]: fact that this was a more, that there was a nuance to that simple story that instead of going directly
[Amit Varma]: to the house, he went to Jeevanlal, why else was it significant? I mean, of course, Jeevanlal was
[Amit Varma]: Padma's father, you know, the older girl's father, you know, at the sort of center of this. Was there
[Amit Varma]: any other reason why it was significant? Or it was just indicative that there are more layers to this?
[Guest]: He wanted to get Jeevanlal to the fields to see something. And I won't go into details for your
[Guest]: listeners, but it was important that Jeevanlal witness what Nazru saw or believed he saw.
[Guest]: And he wanted to, Jeevanlal alone to know, have this information, because he was also sensitive
[Guest]: to the fact that Jeevanlal wouldn't thank him if this information reached anybody else, including
[Guest]: the members of his own family. So he was, as we find out later, being very sneaky,
[Guest]: but at the same time, being protective of his cousins.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. No, that's actually fascinating in the light of what happens and would make sense
[Amit Varma]: from Nazru's point of view. Let's also now, you know, we discussed the ramshackle state of the
[Amit Varma]: police station and the police system. Let's also talk about the post-mortem. And again, you have
[Amit Varma]: a para where you describe this quote, when the convoy of vehicles from Katra drew up at the
[Amit Varma]: gates of the post-mortem house, it was only around 6.30pm, but the place was soaked in darkness.
[Amit Varma]: The district magistrate had to be petitioned for a power generator, then paperwork had to be filed.
[Amit Varma]: And then the police had to find digital cassettes to record the examination. Finally,
[Amit Varma]: someone offered the police his wedding video to tape over. It had now been more than 12 hours
[Amit Varma]: since the girl's bodies were found. And as you've pointed out, the guy who did the main part of the
[Amit Varma]: autopsy, as it were, was an untrained sweeper, because there weren't trained people who would
[Amit Varma]: kind of do this. There was no equipment in the place. So he had actually gone and bought what
[Amit Varma]: was basically a butcher's knife to cut bodies open. And the result was that families or victims
[Amit Varma]: would get bodies back in a mutilated state, which would of course distress them. But there would
[Amit Varma]: also be no useful scientific information from there. And because it had to be determined whether,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there was sexual assault or not, you know, they asked this doctor called Pushpa Tripathi
[Amit Varma]: who wasn't a specialist in this, to kind of go and check the bodies out and talk about how this
[Amit Varma]: got so dramatically botched up and fed into the media narrative of what had actually happened.
[Guest]: So I think anybody who followed the case remembers Lala Ram, who was tasked with carrying out the
[Guest]: postmortem, being described as a sweeper. And I'm sure I'm not the only one who said,
[Guest]: yeah, you know what, that's just investigators trying to discredit the postmortem for their own
[Guest]: reasons. So when I went to Badainu, I met Lala Ram, of course, and I met several other people
[Guest]: who were involved in the postmortem. But because of this description of Lala Ram, you know,
[Guest]: him being a sweeper, him wielding a butcher's knife, which was the language of investigators,
[Guest]: I actually asked for permission to witness him carrying out a postmortem. And so just a few
[Guest]: days after that, while I was in Badainu, Lala Ram phoned me and he said, look, a man got pulled
[Guest]: under his own tractor and the police are bringing him over and he died and the police are bringing
[Guest]: him over. And if you want to watch me, you should hurry up. And so I went to the postmortem house
[Guest]: and I went to, it's basically two rooms in a buffalo field by a river with a train zipping
[Guest]: past. And in those, when I stepped into those two rooms, it was like stepping into a set of
[Guest]: a haunted house, you know, because there were literally cobwebs hanging from the ceilings.
[Guest]: There was red wax on the postmortem table. That is the red sealing wax that is used to
[Guest]: seal postmortem reports. There were rusty implements that I assume had been used in
[Guest]: earlier postmortems. Everything was dusty and the furniture was literally broken. I couldn't
[Guest]: understand where Lala Ram planned to carry out his postmortem. And then I heard his voice and
[Guest]: I stepped out of these rooms and there he was in the back garden in his vest and trousers,
[Guest]: barefoot, because, you know, he didn't want to stain his chappals and he was wearing gloves and
[Guest]: he had a knife in his hand and the body of this young man who had just died was laid out on a
[Guest]: table. It was a metal table. It had been built by the British and it has been standing. That
[Guest]: metal rusty table has been standing in the back garden of this postmortem house for,
[Guest]: I don't know how many hundreds of years. And there was Lala Ram with his knife under the tree,
[Guest]: the crows cawing. And at his feet, there's a bucket where he's essentially, you know,
[Guest]: every time he's opening up a cavity in this young man and taking something out,
[Guest]: he drops it into the bucket. It was so disturbing and so profoundly sad to see
[Guest]: this young man who had been alive just an hour ago, just being chopped up like this, you know.
[Guest]: And Lala Ram was doing what he knew to do. He was doing what he had been trained to do
[Guest]: with it and what the hospital paid him to do. You know, this wasn't somebody who was,
[Guest]: who had taken an oath to be, you know, to be a doctor and then was violating that oath.
[Guest]: This was a man who had grown up in a village close by, who had seen an advertisement in the
[Guest]: newspaper soliciting help in the hospital as a cleaner and who one day when he was cleaning
[Guest]: the wards was asked if he would like to conduct postmortems and has been doing so ever since in
[Guest]: this manner. And Lala Ram is not the exception. This is routinely, as anybody will tell you,
[Guest]: how postmortems in many parts of India are carried out with the obvious results.
[Guest]: And, you know, I saw it firsthand. So Lala Ram was not demonized by investigators,
[Guest]: but I think that what they did not do was offer context, which is that Lala Ram did not,
[Guest]: was not the exception. An individual like Lala Ram is the rule. And, you know,
[Guest]: if I had gotten into a car accident and died in, while I was in Badaini, that's where I would have
[Guest]: ended up. And that's true of anybody living in that area.
[Amit Varma]: It's sort of also an indication of what a pathetic state we are in terms of state capacity in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that you have these procedures, which you implant from, say, a more modern context that in
[Amit Varma]: a Western world, when this happens, we have to do a postmortem. Therefore, we shall do it here.
[Amit Varma]: We shall tick that box. But hey, we don't have the capacity to do it. And therefore, you do some
[Amit Varma]: kind of shoddy jugaad like this. And before you know, it becomes a rule and there is really no
[Amit Varma]: pressure to do any better. Now, an interesting, and we'll come back to the postmortem later,
[Amit Varma]: but an interesting angle that kind of struck me is that in the popular imagination, we think that
[Amit Varma]: all these investigations will be dictated by politics. So you would imagine that Akhilesh
[Amit Varma]: Yadav is for the Yadavs. He'll try to protect the guilty. And then if the CBI comes in, they'll,
[Amit Varma]: you know, act on Modi's orders and he's against the Yadav. So he'll try to, you know, implicate
[Amit Varma]: them. But what happens in a sense is the opposite, that the administration actually acts immediately.
[Amit Varma]: All five policemen are suspended. Two of them are charged with the same crime. All the Yadavs,
[Amit Varma]: the Yadav brothers and Pappu and both his brothers are picked up and taken to the police station.
[Amit Varma]: And both his brothers are picked up and arrested and there's immediate action. And then the CBI
[Amit Varma]: comes in to growing popular demand. And the CBI actually finds that there isn't much merit to this
[Amit Varma]: particular case at all. And I leave it to readers to kind of, you know, go through all the details
[Amit Varma]: and the different layers of that, how the testimonies were kind of kept changing again
[Amit Varma]: and again and were essentially made up. But what struck me was that at the postmortem, you have,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Pushpa Trivedi who comes across this naked body because by that time Lala Ram has
[Amit Varma]: already snipped off the clothes and she finds vaginal blood and there's a crowd outside which
[Amit Varma]: is shouting rape, you know, this pressure from the mob. So she says, yeah, it's a sign of rape,
[Amit Varma]: even though the hymen is intact. And later, the CBI discovers that actually part of the evidence,
[Amit Varma]: which is the clothes that had been snipped off had a menstrual pad. The girl was menstruating,
[Amit Varma]: which explained the menstrual blood and that to call it rape was, you know, not on. And yet Dr.
[Amit Varma]: Pushpa Trivedi, who's a lady in her 50s acting purely out of goodwill, made that decision in
[Amit Varma]: that moment given what was happening. And it seemed to me so, so dangerous and so almost fortuitous
[Amit Varma]: that that sort of that lie gets discovered, you know, or not even a lie that what you thought to
[Amit Varma]: be a fact is not a fact and that gets discovered. Otherwise had events proceeded had the CBI not
[Amit Varma]: come in, for example, you know, Pappu Yadav and his family could, you know, just be in jail forever,
[Amit Varma]: if not murdered there as has happened with other inmates, as we know. So what was your sense just
[Amit Varma]: seeing all of this kind of unfold in the way that it did? I think it just filled me with despair
[Guest]: that, you know, the girls never really had a chance. That, look, I mean, everybody messed up.
[Guest]: Everyone let them down. And most people were not doing it out of malice. People really are just
[Guest]: that ignorant. People really are just that incompetent. They really, they really are like
[Guest]: that. And I think it's easy for us to point to politicians and to just speak in vague terms about,
[Guest]: you know, like systems and not really understand what it's like to be on the ground in places like
[Guest]: this, where everybody is often people are struggling to do their best, but it's not possible.
[Guest]: They don't have the resources. They don't have the education. They don't have the time. And there is
[Guest]: just no accountability, you know. So Dr. Tripathi, as you point out, didn't come to conclusions based
[Guest]: on scientific fact. But Dr. Tripathi shouldn't have been there. You know, that is not her
[Guest]: speciality. If anything, I mean, we must commend her on showing up because she was no one's first
[Guest]: choice. She was not employed by that particular hospital. No doctor in the hospital, no female
[Guest]: doctor specifically, who was asked to come forward did. And why should they? I mean, you know, why
[Guest]: should a dermatologist or a gynecologist or, you know, a general practitioner have to come in and
[Guest]: and assess two dead bodies? So she did it, but she was not equipped to do it. And just as Lala Ram
[Guest]: was not equipped to do his job, and frankly, no one in that room. And, you know, they now then
[Guest]: had to live with the consequences. And they have subsequently spent all the years justifying
[Amit Varma]: their actions. Yes, it's kind of very sad. Now, I don't sort of want to give away the end of your
[Amit Varma]: book, as you said, you'd want the readers to read it for themselves. It's not even a judgment you
[Amit Varma]: come to, it's just that all the facts lead in a particular direction. You know, after reading the
[Amit Varma]: book, I kind of tried to see what was there in the popular domain about this case. And
[Amit Varma]: there's nothing that, you know, comes remotely close to what you uncovered in your book. It's
[Amit Varma]: almost in that sense, like a piece of investigative journalism that comes to a new conclusion. But
[Amit Varma]: the broader conclusion about who is responsible for these deaths seems to me to be everybody.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, one of the moments in the book, which made me just sit up was when Soham Lal is
[Amit Varma]: being questioned, you know, Lalli's father, and he's asked about, you know, that if these girls
[Amit Varma]: had lived and if they brought dishonor to you, what would you do? And he said, I would kill them.
[Amit Varma]: And then it sort of becomes a matter of happenstance that he didn't have to do it,
[Amit Varma]: that it happened in whatever way it happened. And it seems that, you know, even beyond that
[Amit Varma]: single event of what happened that night, you know, those girls were doomed anyway. You know,
[Amit Varma]: and I know that's a very negative conclusion. And in the times that we live in, I sometimes
[Amit Varma]: wonder that, you know, should with all that is happening around us, is there any point to even
[Amit Varma]: being hopeful that this is the way things are? And, you know, my question to you is, you've
[Amit Varma]: actually gone to these places, spoken to these people. One, how do you keep your emotions out
[Amit Varma]: of this while reporting? Like there is one Sonia who obviously feels deeply about this, but there's
[Amit Varma]: another Sonia who's just taking down facts, who's observing things, who's looking for the smallest
[Amit Varma]: things, who's, you know, strategizing what to do next and how to inquire about this. How do you
[Amit Varma]: keep your emotions from getting in the way? How do you keep from being judgmental about all of
[Amit Varma]: these people? I mean, at an intellectual level, sure, we can talk about them and talk about how
[Amit Varma]: they are all victims of circumstance in a sense and, you know, there but for the grace of God go
[Amit Varma]: I. But, you know, but how do you, how do you, what is that process like? Because I can't imagine
[Guest]: doing something like this for as long as you did. I just focus on what is real. You know,
[Guest]: what is real is that I'm a reporter who has a job to do. And I need to do that job in the best
[Guest]: possible way and, and, and make sure that, that it gets done. And that is real. And that is what
[Guest]: I focus on. And I don't focus on how it impacts me. And I, you do, there is an impact in one carries
[Guest]: one's work home, but it's, I can compartmentalize because I don't, I know that I am not the story.
[Guest]: I know that. And I know that my thoughts, my feelings, the impact on me is nothing. It's just
[Guest]: nothing compared to the impact on people who, who continue to inhabit this story long after I have
[Guest]: exited. You know, I can tell the difference. I'll ask you a tangential question, not really
[Amit Varma]: about the book, but something that I've been thinking about to the extent that it will almost
[Amit Varma]: feel like a cliche to listeners of the show where, when I am sort of talking about the constitution
[Amit Varma]: or political philosophy or whatever, with guests who are speaking about the subjects, I'll
[Amit Varma]: ask them that, you know, was our constitutional liberal constitution imposed upon an illiberal
[Amit Varma]: society and therefore bound to fail? And in a sense, you've gone from, you know, the cities
[Amit Varma]: where we have, you know, and both of us being fairly privileged have grown up within these
[Amit Varma]: bubbles where we think of India as liberal and secular and all of these things. And then when
[Amit Varma]: you come into contact with the real India, and you realize that the real India is nothing like this,
[Amit Varma]: that it is completely different place, perhaps inhabiting, you know, different centuries at
[Amit Varma]: different times in 19th century or even before. And my sense always has been that if we wanted
[Amit Varma]: to make India more liberal, it could not have been done through top-down imposition. It had
[Amit Varma]: to happen through social change, much like Mahatma Gandhi himself said, it has to happen from the
[Amit Varma]: bottom up. And that's a task I think that liberals have, number one, failed in, and we have to take
[Amit Varma]: responsibility for that. And I don't know if it is going to happen at all, or whether society
[Amit Varma]: has finally caught up with politics. So, you know, I know I sound very pessimistic there.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, as someone who has left this bubble and actually seen the real India for what it is,
[Amit Varma]: which you described so incredibly evocatively and powerfully in your book,
[Guest]: what's your take on this? I can't afford to be pessimistic, because I think that I just can't,
[Guest]: I won't. Of course, everything you read in the news, everything you see, when you report from,
[Guest]: frankly, most parts of India, will fill you with despair, makes you think that, you know,
[Guest]: this is it. This is the end of civilization. But, you know, the truth is also, as you rightly say,
[Guest]: Amit, that we live in a liberal bubble. And a lot of this idea that things are getting worse
[Guest]: has come to us more recently in the last few years. Whereas, in fact, I suspect that if
[Guest]: we lived in a place like Kashmir, if we belonged to an indigenous community, we would have always
[Guest]: known that India is very, very, very hard on its people, and will snatch even the smallest
[Guest]: iota of power from the most powerless person. So I think that we've experienced a country that
[Guest]: that, in a way that is perhaps not how it has ever been. And I can only be optimistic,
[Guest]: I can only feel that I think there's space for improvement. I don't, I can't, I mean,
[Guest]: I don't want to say things can't get worse, because I think we we know better than that.
[Amit Varma]: But I remain hopeful. Well, you didn't sound very hopeful, but it's been, you know, great
[Amit Varma]: talking to you. And hopefully the next time we chat about something, it can be about more
[Amit Varma]: cheerful subjects. Sonia, thank you so much for not just spending the last couple of hours
[Amit Varma]: chatting with me, but for writing this book and all the work that you do. Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai